FEM user guide update (#6538)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/ug_radio_fem.rst

.. _ug_radio_fem:

Working with RF front-end modules
#################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 4

> An RF front-end module (FEM) is a range extender that increases the range distance and the strength of a link's connection.

Reviewer: And another nitpick: ... a device that amplifies the RF signal, and therefore, ...

> An RF front-end module (FEM) is a range extender that increases the range distance and the strength of a link's connection.

Author: Done

> An RF front-end module (FEM) is a range extender that can be used to increase the range distance and the strength of a link's connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An RF front-end module (FEM) is a range extender that increases the range distance and the strength of a link's connection.
```

> In addition to increasing the range, an RF FEM also increases the robustness of the link connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to extending the range, an RF FEM also increases the robustness of the link connection.
```

Author: Done

> In addition to increasing range, an RF FEM also increases the robustness of the link connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to increasing the range, an RF FEM also increases the robustness of the link connection.
```

A more robust link leads to less packet loss, meaning less retransmissions.

> The probability of successfully receiving the first packet also increases, resulting in a more stable link latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The probability of successfully receiving the first packet also increases, resulting in more stable link latency.
```

FEMs provide a power amplifier (PA) that increases the TX power and a low-noise amplifier (LNA) that increases the RX sensitivity.

> Some FEMs, like the nRF21540, provide a power down (PDN) control that can be used to power down the FEM internal circuits, to reduce energy consumption.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some FEMs, like the nRF21540, provide a power down (PDN) control that powers down the FEM internal circuits, to reduce energy consumption.
```

For testing purposes, a FEM is usually integrated in either a development kit or a shield that you connect to a development kit.

This guide describes how to add support for 2 different front-end module (FEM) implementations to your application in |NCS|.

Software support
****************

> The |NCS| provides FEM support based on the :ref:`nrfxlib:mpsl_fem` in the :ref:`nrfxlib:mpsl` (MPSL) library.

Reviewer: Nitpick to Michal's suggestion: ... FEM, you can... (add comma)

> The |NCS| provides FEM support based on the :ref:`nrfxlib:mpsl_fem` in the :ref:`nrfxlib:mpsl` (MPSL) library.

Author: Done

> It also supports FEM in specific test samples like :ref:`radio_test` and :ref:`direct_test_mode` or you can use you own implementation.

Reviewer: Nitpick to Michal's suggestion: The test samples :ref:.... (leave out in |NCS|)

> It also supports FEM in specific test samples like :ref:`radio_test` and :ref:`direct_test_mode` or you can use you own implementation.

Author: Done

Using MPSL
==========

The MPSL library provides an implementation for the 3-pin GPIO interface of the nRF21540 and a simplified version for FEMs with a 2-pin interface.

> To use this implementation, your application must use a protocol driver that enables the FEM feature provided by the MPSL library.
> The MPSL library provides multiprotocol support, but you can also use it in applications that require only one protocol.
> To avoid conflicts, check the protocol documentation to see if it uses FEM support provided by MPSL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use this implementation, your application must use a protocol driver that enables the FEM feature.
The library provides multiprotocol support, but you can also use it in applications that require only one protocol.
To avoid conflicts, check the protocol documentation to see if the protocol uses FEM support provided by MPSL.
```

.. _ug_radio_fem:

Working with RF front-end modules
#################################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 4

> An RF front-end module (FEM) is a range extender that amplifies the RF signal, and therefore, increases the range distance and the strength of a link's connection.

Author: Ok. I changed this then

In addition to extending the range, an RF FEM also increases the robustness of the link connection.
A more robust link leads to less packet loss, meaning less retransmissions.

> The probability of successfully receiving the first packet also increases, resulting in more stable link latency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The probability of successfully receiving the first packet also increases, resulting in low link latency.
```

Author: Done

FEMs provide a power amplifier (PA) that increases the TX power and a low-noise amplifier (LNA) that increases the RX sensitivity.
Some FEMs, like the nRF21540, provide a power down (PDN) control that powers down the FEM internal circuits, to reduce energy consumption.

For testing purposes, a FEM is usually integrated in either a development kit or a shield that you connect to a development kit.

This guide describes how to add support for 2 different front-end module (FEM) implementations to your application in |NCS|.

Software support
****************

If your application uses radio protocols and requires FEM, you can enable :ref:`nrfxlib:mpsl_fem` in the :ref:`nrfxlib:mpsl` (MPSL) library.
The test samples in |NCS|: :ref:`radio_test` and :ref:`direct_test_mode` also support FEM control.

> You can use as well your own FEM driver when required.

Author: Done

   See :ref:`nrfxlib:mpsl_lib` in the nrfxlib documentation for details.
#. Enable support for MPSL implementation in |NCS| by setting the :kconfig:`CONFIG_MPSL` Kconfig option to ``y``.

.. _ug_radio_fem_direct_support:

Direct support
==============

> If your application cannot use MPSL or if the FEM driver in MPSL does not support all features that you need, you can implement your own driver for nRF21540.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your application cannot use MPSL or if the FEM driver in MPSL does not support all features you need, you can implement your own driver for nRF21540.
```

> The following samples use a direct FEM support:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following samples have direct FEM support:
```

Author: Done

>    * :ref:`direct_test_mode`
>    * :ref:`radio_test`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :ref:`direct_test_mode`
* :ref:`radio_test`
```

> The implementations supported by the above samples are the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementations supported by the samples are the following:
```

>    * :ref:`ug_radio_fem_nrf21540_spi_gpio` - For the nRF21540 SPI/GPIO implementation that uses nRF21540.

Reviewer 3: The SPI implementation is not existing right now. This should be reflected in the docs.

Author: For MPSL it isn/t existing but for DTM and radio test it exists

Reviewer 3: That is true, however the file `doc/nrf/ug_radio_fem.rst` refers to the 'global' scope of FEM support. Please correct me if I'm wrong.

Author: Yes but under the MPSL and under the Direct Support header are explains which modes are supported with links to the corresponding sections

>    * :ref:`ug_radio_fem_nrf21540_spi_gpio` - For the nRF21540 SPI/GPIO implementation that uses nRF21540.
>    * :ref:`ug_radio_fem_skyworks` - For the Simple GPIO implementation that uses the Skyworks devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :ref:`ug_radio_fem_nrf21540_spi_gpio` - For the nRF21540 SPI/GPIO implementation that uses nRF21540.
* :ref:`ug_radio_fem_skyworks` - For the Simple GPIO implementation that uses the Skyworks devices.
```

.. note::
   The nRF5340 DK network core peripherals, like UART and SPI, share an ID and a base address.
   To configure the nRF21540 front-end module gain, write the gain value over the SPI.
   In samples, UART is used as a control interface or shell transport.

>    To send the gain value UART is temporary disabled and restarted after the SPI transfer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   To send the gain value, UART is temporary disabled and restarted after the SPI transfer.
```

See the :ref:`direct_test_mode` samples for an example implementation.

Hardware description
********************

> The |NCS| provides a friendly wrapper that configures FEM based on devicetree (DTS) and Kconfig information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The |NCS| provides a wrapper that configures FEM based on devicetree (DTS) and Kconfig information.
```

Author: Done

> |NCS| provides a friendly wrapper that configures FEM based on devicetree (DTS) and Kconfig information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The |NCS| provides a friendly wrapper that configures FEM based on devicetree (DTS) and Kconfig information.
```

To enable FEM support, you must add an ``nrf_radio_fem`` node in the devicetree file.

> The node can also be provided by the devicetree file of the target devkit or by an overlay file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The node can also be provided by the devicetree file of the target development kit or by an overlay file.
```

See :ref:`zephyr:dt-guide` for more information about the DTS data structure, and :ref:`zephyr:dt_vs_kconfig` for information about differences between DTS and Kconfig.

Adding support for nRF21540
===========================

> The nRF21540 device is a range extender that can be used with nRF52 and nRF53 Series devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The nRF21540 device is a range extender that you can use with nRF52 and nRF53 Series devices.
```

Author: Done

   *  ``802154_rpmsg`` for applications having support for 802.15.4, but not for Bluetooth.
   *  ``hci_rpmsg`` for application having support for Bluetooth, but not for 802.15.4.

   .. note::

>       This step is no needed when testing with :ref:`direct_test_mode` and :ref:`radio_test` on the nRF53 devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      This step is not needed when testing with :ref:`direct_test_mode` and :ref:`radio_test` on the nRF53 Series devices.
```

.. _ug_radio_fem_nrf21540_spi_gpio:

Adding support for nRF21540 in SPI/GPIO mode
--------------------------------------------

> The nRF21540 has also a SPI interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The nRF21540 has also an SPI interface.
```

You can use it to fully control your front-end module or you can use a combination of SPI and GPIO interface.

> The SPI interface gives you for example an ability to set an output power of the nRF21540.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SPI interface enables you, for example, to set the output power of the nRF21540.
```

> To use nRF21540 in SPI or mixed mode, complete the following steps:

Reviewer 3: Mixed mode is not existing right now either.

1. Add the following node in the devicetree file:

   .. code-block::

      / {
            nrf_radio_fem: name_of_fem_node {
               compatible  = "nordic,nrf21540-fem";
               tx-en-gpios = <&gpio0 13 GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH>;
               rx-en-gpios = <&gpio0 14 GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH>;
               pdn-gpios   = <&gpio0 15 GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH>;
               spi-if = <&nrf_radio_fem_spi>
         };
      };
#. Optionally replace the SPI bus device name ``nrf_radio_fem_spi``.
#. Replace the pin numbers provided for each of the required properties:

   * ``tx-en-gpios`` - GPIO characteristic of the device that controls the ``TX_EN`` signal of nRF21540.
   * ``rx-en-gpios`` - GPIO characteristic of the device that controls the ``RX_EN`` signal of nRF21540.
   * ``pdn-gpios`` - GPIO characteristic of the device that controls the ``PDN`` signal of nRF21540.

   These properties correspond to ``TX_EN``, ``RX_EN``, and ``PDN`` pins of nRF21540 that are supported by software FEM.

>    Type ``phandle-array`` is used here, which is common in Zephyr's devicetree to describe GPIO signals.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The``phandle-array`` type is commonly used for describing GPIO signals in Zephyr's devicetree .
```

   The first element ``&gpio0`` refers to the GPIO port ("port 0" has been selected in the example shown).
   The second element is the pin number on that port.
   The last element must be ``GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH`` for nRF21540, but for a different FEM module you can use ``GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW``.

   The state of the remaining control pins should be set in other ways and according to `nRF21540 Product Specification`_.
#. Add a following SPI bus device node on the devicetree file:

   .. code-block::

      fem_spi: &spi3 {
	      status = "okay";
	      sck-pin = <47>;
	      miso-pin = <46>;
	      mosi-pin = <45>;
	      cs-gpios = <&gpio0 21 GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW>;

	      nrf_radio_fem_spi: nrf21540_fem_spi@0 {
		      compatible = "nordic,nrf21540-fem-spi";
		      status = "okay";
		      reg = <0>;
		      label = "FEM_SPI_IF";
		      spi-max-frequency = <8000000>;
	      };
      };

>    In this example, the nRF21540 is controlled by the ``spi3`` bus. Replace the SPI bus according to your hardware design.
>    Replace the SPI bus device name ``nrf_radio_fem_spi`` with the name from the previous step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In this example, the nRF21540 is controlled by the ``spi3`` bus.
   Replace the SPI bus according to your hardware design.
   Replace the SPI bus device name ``nrf_radio_fem_spi`` with the name from the previous step.
```

#. Replace the pin numbers provided for each of the required properties:

   * ``sck-pin`` -  GPIO pin number of the device that controls the ``SCK`` signal of the nRF21540.
   * ``miso-pin`` - GPIO pin number of the device that controls the ``MISO`` signal of the nRF21540.
   * ``mosi-pin`` - GPIO pin number of the device that controls the ``MOSI`` signal of the nRF21540.
   * ``cs-gpio`` - GPIO characteristic of the device that controls the ``CSN`` signal of nRF21540.

   ``sck-pin``, ``miso-pin``, ``mosi-pin`` are absolute pin numbers.

>    Use a following formula to calculate them::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Use the following formula to calculate them::
```

      pin_no = b\*32 + a

>    where ``a`` and ``b`` are from the Pin value in the table (Pb.a).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   In this formula, ``a`` and ``b`` are from the Pin value in the table (Pb.a).
```
Where is the table introduced?

   For example, for P0.1, ``pin_no = 1`` and for P1.0, ``pin_no = 32``.

Optional properties
-------------------

> The following properties are optional and can be added to the devicetree node if needed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following properties are optional and you can add them to the devicetree node if needed.
```

               rx-en-gpios = <&gpio0 14 GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH>;
               pdn-gpios   = <&gpio0 15 GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH>;
               spi-if = <&nrf_radio_fem_spi>
         };
      };
#. Optionally replace the SPI bus device name ``nrf_radio_fem_spi``.
#. Replace the pin numbers provided for each of the required properties:

   * ``tx-en-gpios`` - GPIO characteristic of the device that controls the ``TX_EN`` signal of nRF21540.
   * ``rx-en-gpios`` - GPIO characteristic of the device that controls the ``RX_EN`` signal of nRF21540.
   * ``pdn-gpios`` - GPIO characteristic of the device that controls the ``PDN`` signal of nRF21540.

   These properties correspond to ``TX_EN``, ``RX_EN``, and ``PDN`` pins of nRF21540 that are supported by software FEM.

   The``phandle-array`` type is commonly used for describing GPIO signals in Zephyr's devicetree.
   The first element ``&gpio0`` refers to the GPIO port ("port 0" has been selected in the example shown).
   The second element is the pin number on that port.
   The last element must be ``GPIO_ACTIVE_HIGH`` for nRF21540, but for a different FEM module you can use ``GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW``.

>    The state of the remaining control pins should be set in other ways and according to `nRF21540 Product Specification`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Set the state of the remaining control pins according to the `nRF21540 Product Specification`_.
```

Author: Done

	      sck-pin = <47>;
	      miso-pin = <46>;
	      mosi-pin = <45>;
	      cs-gpios = <&gpio0 21 GPIO_ACTIVE_LOW>;

	      nrf_radio_fem_spi: nrf21540_fem_spi@0 {
		      compatible = "nordic,nrf21540-fem-spi";
		      status = "okay";
		      reg = <0>;
		      label = "FEM_SPI_IF";
		      spi-max-frequency = <8000000>;
	      };
      };

   In this example, the nRF21540 is controlled by the ``spi3`` bus.
   Replace the SPI bus according to your hardware design.
   Replace the SPI bus device name ``nrf_radio_fem_spi`` with the name from the previous step.

#. Replace the pin numbers provided for each of the required properties:

   * ``sck-pin`` -  GPIO pin number of the device that controls the ``SCK`` signal of the nRF21540.
   * ``miso-pin`` - GPIO pin number of the device that controls the ``MISO`` signal of the nRF21540.
   * ``mosi-pin`` - GPIO pin number of the device that controls the ``MOSI`` signal of the nRF21540.
   * ``cs-gpio`` - GPIO characteristic of the device that controls the ``CSN`` signal of nRF21540.

   ``sck-pin``, ``miso-pin``, ``mosi-pin`` are absolute pin numbers.
   Use the following formula to calculate them::

      pin_no = b\*32 + a

>    In this formula ``a`` and ``b`` are from the Pin value in the table (Pb.a).

Reviewer 2: Can we say that 'b' is a port number and 'a' ia a pin number within the port. Which table is referred to here?

Reviewer: I wondered the same about the table.

Author: You a right. I changed it :)

   *  ``802154_rpmsg`` for applications having support for 802.15.4, but not for Bluetooth.
   *  ``hci_rpmsg`` for application having support for Bluetooth, but not for 802.15.4.

   .. note::
       This step is not needed when testing with :ref:`direct_test_mode` and :ref:`radio_test` on the nRF53 Series devices.

.. _ug_radio_fem_nrf21540_spi_gpio:

SPI/GPIO mode
-------------

> The nRF21540 has also an SPI interface.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The nRF21540 features an SPI interface.
```

Author: Done

.. _ug_radio_fem_skyworks:

Adding support for Skyworks front-end module
============================================

> The Skyworks range extenders can be used with nRF52 and nRF53 Series devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use the Skyworks range extenders with nRF52 and nRF53 Series devices.
```

SKY66112-11 is one of many FEM devices that support the 2-pin PA/LNA interface.

> |NCS| provides also devicetree bindings for the SKY66114-11 and SKY66403-11.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The |NCS| provides also devicetree bindings for the SKY66114-11 and SKY66403-11.
```

> You can use it as example how to create bindings for different devices that support 2-pin PA/LNA interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use SKY66112-11 as an example on how to create bindings for different devices that support the 2-pin PA/LNA interface.
```

> For more details about devicetree binding check: :ref:`Zephyr documentation <zephyr:dt-bindings>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details about devicetree binding, see: :ref:`Zephyr documentation <zephyr:dt-bindings>`.
```

   See the official `SKY66112-11 page`_ for more information.

Optional properties
-------------------

> The following properties are optional and can be added to the devicetree node if needed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following properties are optional and you can add them to the devicetree node if needed.
```

.. _ug_radio_fem_boards:

Hardware support
****************

Two nRF21540 boards are available, showcasing the possibilities of the nRF21540 FEM:

* :ref:`nRF21540 DK <nrf21540dk_nrf52840>`

> * nRF21540 EK, described in sections below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* :ref:`ug_radio_fem_nrf21540_ek`
```

> There is also a few boards that have 2-pin PA/LNA interface, for example SKY66112-11EK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are also some boards that have the 2-pin PA/LNA interface, for example SKY66112-11EK.
```

The front-end module feature is supported on the nRF52 and nRF53 Series devices.

nRF21540 DK
===========

The nRF21540 DK is a development kit contains the nRF52840 with the additional nRF21540 front-end module.
You can use it in similar way like :ref`nRF52840 DK <nrf52840dk_nrf52840>`
It is the easy way to start with front-end modules tests.
For more details see :ref:`nRF21540 DK <nrf21540dk_nrf52840>`

Shields
=======

Shields are adds on that you can attach to the development kit to extend its feature and functionalities.

.. _ug_radio_fem_nrf21540_ek:

nRF21540 EK

> -----------

Author: I don't think so. The EK is a shield so I put it under the shield header which is on the same heading level as nRF21540 DK. I can do changes if you want to

.. _ug_radio_fem_boards:

Hardware support
****************

Two nRF21540 boards are available, showcasing the possibilities of the nRF21540 FEM:

* :ref:`nRF21540 DK <nrf21540dk_nrf52840>`
* :ref:`ug_radio_fem_nrf21540_ek`

> There are also some boards that have the 2-pin PA/LNA interface, for example SKY66112-11EK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example SKY66112-11EK also has a 2-pin PA/LNA interface.
```

Author: Done

The front-end module feature is supported on the nRF52 and nRF53 Series devices.

nRF21540 DK
===========

> The nRF21540 DK is a development kit that has the nRF52840 DK combined with the additional nRF21540 front-end module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The nRF21540 DK is a development kit that has the nRF52840 device combined with the additional nRF21540 front-end module.
```

Author: Done

You can use it the same way as :ref:`zephyr:nrf52840dk_nrf52840`

> It is the easy way to start testing front-end modules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is an easy way to start testing front-end modules.
```

Author: Done

.. _ug_radio_fem_boards:

Hardware support
****************

Two nRF21540 boards are available, showcasing the possibilities of the nRF21540 FEM:

* :ref:`nRF21540 DK <nrf21540dk_nrf52840>`
* :ref:`ug_radio_fem_nrf21540_ek`

> For example SKY66112-11EK also has a 2-pin PA/LNA interface.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For example, SKY66112-11EK also has a 2-pin PA/LNA interface.
```
TBH, I don't get this sentence here, it looks out of place. @peknis

Author: Maybe I would add this sentence before: Also various Skyworks front-end modules are supported

Author: Please check the new version

The front-end module feature is supported on the nRF52 and nRF53 Series devices.

nRF21540 DK
===========

> The nRF21540 DK is a development kit that has the nRF52840 device combined with the additional nRF21540 front-end module.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The nRF21540 DK is a development kit that features the nRF52840 device combined with the additional nRF21540 front-end module.
```

Author: Done

> You can use it the same way as :ref:`zephyr:nrf52840dk_nrf52840`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can use it the same way as :ref:`zephyr:nrf52840dk_nrf52840`.
```

Author: Done

It is an easy way to start testing front-end modules.

> For more details see :ref:`nRF21540 DK <nrf21540dk_nrf52840>`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For more details, see :ref:`nRF21540 DK <nrf21540dk_nrf52840>`.
```

Author: Done

Shields
=======

> Shields are adds on that you can attach to the development kit to extend its feature and functionalities.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Shields are add-ons that you can attach to the development kit to extend its feature and functionalities.
```

Author: Done

*  ``hci_rpmsg_`` for application with support for Bluetooth, but without support for 802.15.4

References
^^^^^^^^^^

* `nRF21540 DK product page`_
* `nRF21540 Product Specification`_
* `nRF21540`_

Shields with 2-pin PA/LNA interface
-----------------------------------

> The SKY66112-11EK is an example of shield with a 2-pin PA/LNA interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SKY66112-11EK is an example of a shield with the 2-pin PA/LNA interface.
```

Perform the following steps to use it:

1. Connect the shield to the development kit.

> #. Follow the steps from :ref:`ug_radio_fem_skyworks` to add a fem node in devicetree.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Follow the steps in the :ref:`ug_radio_fem_skyworks` to add a FEM node in the devicetree.
```

#. Build your project.

> #. Flash development kit with the built project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Program the development kit with the built project.
```

*  ``hci_rpmsg_`` for application with support for Bluetooth, but without support for 802.15.4

References
^^^^^^^^^^

* `nRF21540 DK product page`_
* `nRF21540 Product Specification`_
* `nRF21540`_

Shields with 2-pin PA/LNA interface
-----------------------------------

The SKY66112-11EK is an example of a shield with the 2-pin PA/LNA interface.

Perform the following steps to use it:

1. Connect the shield to the development kit.
#. Follow the steps in the :ref:`ug_radio_fem_skyworks` to add a FEM node in the devicetree.
#. Build your project.

> #. Program the development kit with the built project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#. Program the development kit with the created binary file.
```

Author: Done
